# Power Logger

## Purpose

The program is intended to log the information from Carlo Gavazzi ET112-Din Energy Meter at one minute intervals to a CSV file. The energy meter has an RS485 Modbus RTU interface, it communicates with a WaveShare RS485 to POE Eth (B) gateway. The gateway has been configured to poll the Energy Meter and at approximately 10 s intervals publish to a MQTT broker, thus making the Energy Meter information available to applications running on multiple platforms. This logger represents one such application, In concept it will provide data to inform the sizeing of a future PV system with battery storage.

## The Sofware

The Host Name (MQTT broker), User Name, Password, and Topic are provided as command line parameter. It has been written to be run as a service on a a Raspberry Pi but should run on other linux platforms. MQTT support is provided by libmosquitto and in this case the mosquitto broker is being used. libmosquitto with its client side software should work with any other MQTT broker. The GNATCOLL.JSON package has been used to parse the messages published by the gateway. The program expects to receive messages at approximately 10 s intervals, where it is sensible, the values received in the last six messages are averaged, that is, Voltage, Current, VA, VAR, Frequency and Power Factor. The average over the last six receives being logged. The accumulated Imported energy (kWh), Exported energy and Hours Counter from the last reveived message are logged. Each row of the CSV file has a time stamp which is the local time for the machine running the software (logging computer). The messages from the gateway are time stamped with CN (Chinese time) the local and message times are internally represented as UTC and a difference is calculated, this is also written to the CSV file. The primary purpose of this is to provide an indication that everything is working as expected, that is, both the gateway and the logging cpmputer have clocks that are reasonably accurate and there has been no significant delay in the messages being received. If all is well the difference should be less than 10 with small negative values being possible if the gateway clock is ahead of the logging computer. Both the logging computer and the gateway are getting their time updated from NTP public servers.

## Start Up

It is assumed that the logging computer and the gateway are powered from the same power source as the networking infrastructure. The latter will definitly be the case if the POE feature of the gateway is used. The start of connection to the MQTT broker is delayed 45 s after the software starts, this is to allow time for network services such as DNS to become available. It is assumed that the software will be started as a systemd service dleayed until multi operation is available. On startup a time stamped message indicating when comnnection to the MQTT broker is initiated, the command line parameters (excluding the password) and the version of the software are written to a file Event.csv. In this file alread exists it is opened in append mode otherwise a new file is created. An Error.csv file is also opened in append mode if it exists or a new file created. If any unhandled exceptions are raised this will be recorded in this file. On startup the software checks for a directory numbered for the current year (e.g. 2026) if this does not exist a new directory is created. It then checks in that directory for a file named for the current day in the format yyyymmdd.csv (e.g 20260317.csv, 17 March 2026), if the file exists it is opened in the append mode. If the file does not exist it is created and a heading line is writtenn to the file, laneling each column.

## Operation

In normal operation a new log file is created at 00:00:00 local time with a header and the data time stamoed 00:00:00. A new line (record) is added each minute, in general the time stamp will have 00 in the seconds. Once per hour the file buffer is flushed such that all the data logged in the last hour is written to disc (SD card for a RPI). One hour is a comprmise between wearing out the SD card and the amount of data lost if there is a power failure. In normal operation, a header line and 1440 (24 * 60) lines of data are written to a a day's file. In normal operation the last line written will be time stamped 23:59:00.
Testing has not been done for locales where daylight saving applies.

## Shut Down

Because the software is intended to run as a service it will shutdown on receipt of a linux sigterm signal or ^C if running in a command prompt. The software will attempt an orderly shutdown, disconnecting from the MQTT broker, releasing the libmosquitto resources, report normal shutdown in the event file (Event.csv) and closing all the open files. Usually systemd allows 120 s for an orderly shutdown before killing the process. When running as a service the user can control the service using systemctl commands. There are various onlone tutorials on setting up software to run as a service.

## The CSV File

As stated above a new file is created for each day with the first line (record) being written at 00:00:00 and the last written at 23:59:00. The time is local time based on the logging computer's locale setting. The CSV format is convenient for importation into spread sheets for analysis or graphing etc. Using the pane frezing feature of the spreadsheet the time stamp and header can remain in view. The output to the CSV file has been formated to match the energy meter documentation, for example current is represented to three decimal places (1mA resolution). The formatting involves conversion of the received datawhich is either 16 bit or 32 bit unsigned integers.

## The Gateway

On paper WaveShare RS485 to POE Eth (B) gateway is versatile device with an almost unique set of features, Modbus RTU, Modbus TCP, MQTT and power over ethernet (POE). The hardware appears well made but its firmware and configuration software are a bit clunky to say the least. The gatway had its last firmware update in 2007! Waveshare has online tutorials for setting it up. The NTP feature is poorly documented and required a file ntp.txt to be added to the configuration directory on the windows host being used to configure the gateway and then downloaded to the gateway. This file and the exported MQTT configuration can be found in the gatway_configuration directory of this repository. The IP addresses of up to three NTP servers can be added, the example ntp.txt file is appropriate for Telstra customers in Queensland Australia. The time reported is UTC+8 (China). The delay between Modbus commands has been set as 1s, because the data being read is not in contiguous holding registers the gateway has to issue four Modbus commands. The energy meter typically replys within 40ms (verified in testing) but according to documentation could take up to 500ms to reply. Allowing significant dead time is essential if the RS485 bus is shared with other Modbus cliants (not tested). The information is transmitted as unsigned 16 or 32 numbers. The Energy meter output is actually signed integers. Theoretically the gateway setup could convert this into properly signed values with decimal points in the correct position. In testing this did not appear to work correctly with the little endian/big endian control also reversing the byte order in 16 bit quantities, not just reversing the register order for 32 bit quantities, as indicated by the configuration software user interface.
